+++
title="Intermission: Crystals"
weight=3
description = "Mechanical guide to the crystal intermission between phases 2 and 3 of Futures Rewritten (Ultimate)."

[extra]
toc = true
sectoc = true
short_title = "Intermission"
+++
Assuming the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} was successfully brought below 20% in her phase,
there's a short intermission phase before phase 3.
After the {{ice(t="Absolute Zero")}} cast, {{mob(n="Shiva")}} knocks everyone back from center
and inflicts {{buff(b="deep-freeze")}} on everyone, forcing you to wait for a brief scene,
as {{mob(n="Shiva")}} becomes encased in ice, just like in {{gloss(k="E8N")}}.

16 seconds later, the {{buff(b="deep-freeze", short=true)}} lifts, and the crystals spawn.
4 {{mob(n="Crystals of Light")}} spawn on the cardinals far away from the boss,
while 4 {{mob(n="Crystals of Darkness")}} spawn on the intercardinals close to the boss.
The crystal covering the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} is called the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}},
and it almost immediately begins casting {{ice(t="Endless Ice Age")}}, the enrage for the phase.
You must destroy the {{mob(n="Veil")}} before the cast completes to progress to phase 3.

The crystals are all tethered to the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}}, granting it {{buff(b="invincibility")}}.
If you destroy all the adds, the {{buff(b="invincibility", short=true)}} will be removed
and the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}} will fall rapidly.

Gaia will also appear, channeling darkness energy into the crystal in an attempt to free Ryne.
It doesn't seem to be doing much, though...

## Crystal Attacks

There isn't much in the way of mechanics in this intermission.
Periodically, each of the {{mob(n="Crystals of Light")}}
will target a large, circular {{gloss(k="AoE")}} at the nearest player,
while each fo the {{mob(n="Crystals of Darkness")}} will target the nearest player
with a narrow cone.

Oddly, there's no castbar for the big circles,
but the narrow cones are called {{ice(n="Sinbound Blizzard")}}.
You must be careful about aiming the cones, because if they hit a crystal,
that crystal will receive {{buff(b="vuln-down")}} for the remainder of the phase,
making it much harder to kill.

With the second wave of AoEs, the {{mob(n="Crystals of Light")}} will target the nearest players
with passable tethers.
After the third wave, the targeted players will be hit by a series of three
{{cast(n="Hiemal Ray")}}, small circular AoEs leaving behind puddles that inflict a
{{gloss(k="DoT")}}.

## The Eternal Ice Fragment

If you dsetroy all the crystals and the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}},
then the crystal holding {{mob(n="Shiva")}} shatters and the transition to phase 3 begins.
An interactable {{mob(n="Eternal Ice Fragment")}} appears on the ground
just in front of {{mob(n="Shiva")}}, but it shatters before anyone can interact with it.
If you remember your lore, one of Gaia's key memories you saved during {{gloss(k="E12N")}}
was of Ryne and Gaia making the fragment into a necklace.
Its destruction seems portentious...

And in actual fact, while you can proceed to the end of phase 4
withotu the {{mob(n="Eternal Ice Fragment")}},
you will be unable to enter phase 5 and clear the fight.
Gaia's voice line near the end of the phase, "Is my darkness not enough?!"
is the clue to the alternate solution to the phase that's required to clear.

Instead of killing the {{mob(n="Crystals of Darkness")}}, they must all be left alive.
If all four survive while the {{mob(n="Crystals of Light")}} die,
they will begin channeling {{dark()}} energy into Gaia and the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}}.
Note that using caster LB3 will instantly defeat the {{mob(n="Crystals of Darkness")}},
so it can't be used if you want to clear the intermission correctly.

The {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}} will lose its {{buff(b="invincibility")}}
and gain a {{buff(b="vuln-down")}} in its place, reducing incoming damage by 50%.
To make up for it, Gaia's channeling will complete successfully,
and near the end of the {{ice(t="Endless Ice Age")}} cast,
Gaia will do her enormous hammer slam from {{gloss(k="E12N")}}
and remove a full half of the {{mob(n="Ice Veil")}}'s health bar.

If you complete the phase in this way, then instead of shattering,
the {{mob(n="Eternal Ice Fragment")}} will be absorbed into {{mob(n="Shiva")}}
and you will be on the path to clearing the fight.
