+++
title = "Phase 1: Fatebreaker"
weight = 1
description = "Mechanical guide to phase 1 of Futures Rewritten (Ultimate)."

[extra]
toc = true
sectoc = true
short_title = "Fatebreaker"
+++
The fight begins with {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}}, the boss from {{gloss(k="E8S")}}.
The mechanics will be quite familiar if you've done E11S, although there are no light attacks.
To clear the phase, {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} must be defeated completely.

This phase is largely uptime, with a single downtime mechanic.

Unless otherwise noted, any attack other than a spread, stack, raidwide, or tankbuster inflicts
{{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m")}}, and all spreads and stacks inflict {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=2)}}.

## Sequence 1: Cyclonic Break

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} immediately jumps into a mechanic sequence
with a {{cast(n="Cyclonic Break")}} cast.
During this cast, he will be surrounded by either {{fire()}} or {{elec()}}.
This will determine whether you need to {{fire(t="stack")}} in pairs or
{{elec(t="spread")}} during the mechanic.

The attack executes a narrow (22.5°) conal spread targeting each player, without an
{{gloss(k="omen")}}.
These inflict {{buff(b="pvuln", dur=2)}}, so any player hit by two or more will die.
The location of these cones is saved and will be used for the rest of the mechanic.

2 seconds after the first cones, a second set of cones go out on the same location.
These must be dodged.
At the same time, players will be hit by a {{fire()}} or {{elec()}} attack:

* If it is {{fire()}}, then each {{dps()}} will be hit
  by {{fire(t="Sinsmoke")}}, a {{gloss(k="pair stack")}} {{gloss(k="AoE")}}.
  For each dead {{dps()}}, the attack will hit a random {{supp()}} instead,
  <mark class="unconfirmed">doubling up if fewer than four players are alive.</mark>

* If it is {{elec()}}, then all players will be hit by {{elec(t="Sinsmite")}}, a
  spread AoE.

After the second set of cones and stack/spread, two more sets of cones go out, one after the other.
Each is rotated clockwise from the previous by 1/16th of a circle
(22.5°, i.e. one cone's width).
Like the second set, these must be dodged.

### Powder Mark Trail

As {{cast(n="Cyclonic Break")}} resolves,
{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} casts {{cast(n="Power Mark Trail")}},
a single-target tankbuster that inflicts both {{buff(b="powder-mark", dur=16)}} and
{{buff(b="pvuln", dur=14)}}.
The {{buff(b="powder-mark", short=true)}} will explode if the tank dies or at the start of the next
mechanic.
while the {{buff(b="pvuln", short=true)}} will cause subsequent auto-attacks to be lethal.

## Sequence 2: Unbroken Sky

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} begins casting Unbroken sky,
and once again is surrounded by {{fire()}} or {{elec()}}.
As before, this signals the upcoming {{fire(t="spread")}} or {{elec(t="stack")}}.

Once the cast completes, {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} goes untargetable and disappears,
and the arena is be covered in a deep fog.
If you've played {{gloss(k="E11S")}},
you will recognize this from {{cast(n="Prismatic Deception")}}.
Eight {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} clones—{{mob(n="Fatebreaker's Image")}}—will
appear just outside the arena, one in each {{gloss(k="principal direction")}}.
Due to the fog, they can only be seen if you are nearby.
Right after they appear, the {{buff(b="powder-mark", short=true)}} from earlier will expire,
causing large {{gloss(k="AoE")}} tankbusters to hit both the player originally hit by
{{cast(n="Powder Mark Trail")}} and the player nearest to them.

Three of the clones will raise their gunblades to point straight up and begin casting
{{cast(n="Blasting Zone")}},
while the rest will keep theirs facing downwards and at an angle before disappearing.
{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} reappears just before the casts complete, and begins charging a new
{{cast(n="Cyclonic Break")}}. The {{fire()}} or {{elec()}} element need not be the same as before.

When the {{cast(n="Blasting Zone")}} completes,
the three clones will cleave in front of them in a line.
At the same time, players will be hit by an attack depending on the element
charged during the {{cast(n="Unbroken Sky")}} cast:

* {{fire(t="Sinbound Fire III")}}, an {{gloss(k="LP stack")}} AoE.
* {{elec(t="Sinbound Thunder III")}}, a spread AoE.

When {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} finishes casting,
the second {{cast(n="Cyclonic Break")}} is exactly the same as the first,
except that the element is random and may be different from before.

### Turn of the Heavens

During the execution of {{cast(n="Cyclonic Break")}}, two more clones will appear:
one just north of {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}}, and one at the west side of the arena.
The one next to {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} casts {{cast(n="Turn of the Heavens")}}
with either {{fire()}} or {{elec()}},
while the one on the edge will cast {{elec(t="Burnt Strike")}}.

As the cast completes:

* Four {{fire(t="Halo of Flame")}} and four {{elec(t="Halo of Levin")}} appear
  near the outside of the arena at cardinals and intercardinals. They are always positioned with
  {{fire(t="Flame")}} halos on the west or east side, and {{elec(t="Levin")}} halos on the other.
  The halos begin casting {{cast(n="Brightfire")}}.
* Two clones appear at random intercardinals, tethered to two random players,
  and begin casting {{fire(t="Bound of Faith")}}.
  The tethered players also receive {{buff(b="prey")}} and {{buff(b="fated-burn", dur=15)}}.
* One more clone appears at the north end of the arena,
  casting {{fire(t="Burnt Strike")}}.

After the new adds begin casting, the first {{cast(n="Burnt Strike")}} goes off,
cleaving in a line from west to east.
The cleave repeats immediately, but is substantially wider the second time.
A few seconds later, the second {{cast(n="Burnt Strike")}} goes off, cleaving from north to south.
The follow-up strike will hit all players with a knockback east or west, away from the center.
These knockbacks cannot be resisted.

Shortly afterwards, all the halos explode, dealing lethal damage in a circle.
The halos that do not match the element of the {{cast(n="Turn of the Heavens")}} cast only explode
directly underneath themselves.
The halos that do match will explode inside the larger circle denoted on the floor.

At the same time, the two tethered players are lifted into the air with
{{buff(b="fetters", dur=3)}}, then charged by the adds and hit with {{fire(t="Sinsmoke")}}.
Unlike earlier, this {{fire(t="Sinsmoke")}} is an {{gloss(k="LP stack")}} that inflicts
{{buff(b="mom", dur="2m")}} if it hits fewer than 4 players.
If the tethered player died, a random player will be targeted instead.

### Burnished Glory

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} reappears shortly after {{fire(t="Sinsmoke")}},
and is immediately targetable.
The sequence wraps up with {{cast(n="Burnished Glory")}},
a raidwide that inflicts a heavy {{buff(b="bleed", dur=15)}}.

## Sequence 3: Fall of Faith

The third sequence begins with a {{cast(n="Fall of Faith")}} cast.
{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} will glow with {{fire()}} or {{elec()}} energy,
and mark a player with a tether and {{buff(b="prey")}}.
The tether will glow {{fire(t="red")}} or {{elec(t="blue")}} depending on the element being charged.

Over the course of the cast, three clones will appear at the NW, N, and NE edges of the arena,
in that order.
Each will begin casting its own {{cast(n="Fall of Faith")}} with its own tether and
{{buff(b="prey", short=true)}}, for a total of four on four different targets.

When the casts complete, similar to the end of the previous sequence,
the boss or clone will lift their target into the air with {{buff(b="fetters", dur=3)}} and charge
at them.
The attack is either {{fire(t="Sinblaze")}} or {{elec(t="Sinsmite")}},
depending on the element, but with completely new mechanics:

* {{fire(t="Sinblaze")}} hits the targeted player as well as producing a 90° cone originating from
  the target, aimed towards the nearest player.
  The entire attack is an {{gloss(k="LP stack")}}
  so to satisfy the stack, there must be at least three players inside the cone,
  plus the main target.
  If there are fewer than four players total hit by the attack,
  it will inflict {{buff(b="mom", dur="2m")}}.
* {{elec(t="Sinsmite")}} hits the targeted player
  and produces three 120° cones originating from them, aimed towards the three nearest players.
  Because these are so wide, positioning is critical.

Both {{fire(t="Sinblaze")}} and {{elec(t="Sinsmite")}} inflict {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=4)}},
which lasts until after the next attack in the sequence.
Thus, a player hit by two consecutive attacks will die.

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} completes the sequence with another {{cast(n="Burnished Glory")}}
and another {{cast(n="Powder Mark Trail")}}.
Note that the {{gloss(k="DoT")}} from the {{cast(n="Burnished Glory")}} will make the tankbuster
require more mitigation/healing than the first time.

## Sequence 4: Burnt Strike

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} casts {{cast(n="Burnt Strike")}}, glowing with {{fire()}} or {{elec()}}.
As he does so, three towers appear along the east or west edge of the arena.
The total number of players required for the towers is always 6,
but the distribution is random: it could be 1/1/4, 1/2/3, or 2/2/2 in any order.

The {{cast(n="Burnt Strike")}} is a north-south line cleave, followed by:

* For {{fire()}}, all players are knocked back east or west away from the center.
* For {{elec()}}, a second, wider line cleave.

Right after the follow-up attack, the towers will go off and, at the same time,
the {{buff(b="powder-mark")}} detonates on its target and the newest player
If a tower is missed, it explodes in a heavy raidwide
with {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}.

## Enrage

{{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} now casts {{cast(n="Burnished Glory")}} for a third and final time,
with a long castbar.
If the cast succeeds, the party wipes.
To proceed to the next phase, {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} must be killed before the cast completes.

## Acknowledgments

Thanks to various players in the NAUR discord for answering my questions and running tests,
particularly {{mob(n="Cia")}}, {{mob(n="Bonafide Bovine")}}, {{mob(n="Unit")}}, {{mob(n="HopeP")}},
and {{mob(n="Ewaen Enjinia")}}.
Thanks also to everyone who has progged this fight early and uploaded PoVs for my reference.
