+++
title="Phase 2: Usurper of Frost"
weight=2
description = "Mechanical guide to phase 2 of Futures Rewritten (Ultimate)."

[extra]
toc = true
sectoc = true
short_title = "Usurper of Frost"
+++
As soon as {{mob(n="Fatebreaker")}} dies, the arena transitions to {{mob(n="Shiva")}}'s arena from
{{gloss(k="E8S")}}, and {{mob(n="Shiva")}} herself appears.
Although she looks the same, Ryne is possessed by Mitron
and is called the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}}.
But everyone still calls her {{mob(n="Shiva")}}.

This phase is the closest that FRU has to a trio phase, with two long downtime mechanics.
Unlike a traditional trio phase, however, there is a little bit of uptime mechanic sprinkled in.
To complete the phase, she must be brought down below 20% health before the end of the enrage.
Also, unlike in the original fight, the edge of the arena is not a cliff
but stays as the traditional Ultimate deathwall.

As before, unless otherwise noted, any attack
other than a spread, stack, raidwide, or tankbuster inflicts {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m")}},
and all spreads and stacks inflict {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=2)}}
to prevent players from taking multiple hits.

## Intro

{{mob(n="Shiva")}} kicks things off with {{cast(n="Quadruple Slap")}},
a tankbuster that only actually has two hits.
It's a typical one-two buster with room for a tank swap.
It inflicts a cleansable {{buff(b="pvuln-esuna", dur=15)}},
forcing a swap, cleanse, or invuln.[^3]

After one follow-up auto—which can also be lethal, thanks to the vuln—{{mob(n="Shiva")}}
teleports to south of center, faces north, and begins casting {{cast(n="Mirror Image")}}.
This cast has no associated attack, but summons a {{light(t="light-form")}} clone,
the {{mob(n="Oracle's Reflection")}}, directly in the center of the arena.
The {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} herself remains in {{ice(t="ice form")}}.
The two of them will bounce around a lot during the next mechanic.

[^3]: Personally, I suggest not passing up this rare opportunity
      to yell at the {{dps(t="bard")}}, instead of a {{tank()}} or {{healer()}},
      when the main tank unexpectedly dies to the second hit.

## Sequence 1: Diamond Dust

### AoE Hell

Once the {{mob(n="Reflection")}} appears, {{mob(n="Shiva")}} casts {{ice(t="Diamond Dust")}},
a raidwide that kicks off the real mechanic.
Note that the raidwide is slightly delayed from the end of the cast.
Don't mitigate too early.
{{mob(n="Shiva")}} herself disappears, kicking off the long downtime mechanic.

Three different things happen in rapid succession:

1. It wouldn't be a Shiva fight without the classic circular AoEs
   around the oustide of the arena.
2. The {{mob(n="Oracle's Reflection")}} begins casting
   either {{light(t="Axe Kick")}} or {{light(t="Scythe Kick")}}.
3. Four players--all {{dps()}} or all {{supp(t="supports")}}--are
   targeted by markers with a circular yellow omen.

All of these mechanics, and more, need to be solved simultaneously.

1. {{gloss(k="Omens")}} for the classic circle AoEs—the true
   {{ice(t="Diamond Dust")}}—appear in the {{gloss(k="principal directions")}} in three waves.
   The first wave has two circles, appearing opposite one another.

   The second wave spreads out from the first wave:
   If the first wave was on a pair of cardinals,
   then the second wave will be on the four intercardinals.
   Conversely, if the first wave was on intercardinals,
   then the second wave will be on the four cardinals.

   The third wave will hit the two remaining cardinals or intercardinals,
   at 90° from the first wave.
   All three waves must be completely dodged.

2. The {{mob(n="Oracle's Reflection")}}'s cast will be either
   a point-blank ({{light(t="Axe Kick")}}) or a donut ({{light(t="Scythe Kick")}}).
   These AoEs are very big:

      1. The point-blank {{light(t="Axe Kick")}} goes all the way out to the outer
         line[^4] on the floor.

      2. The donut {{light(t="Scythe Kick")}} extends
         to well within the {{mob(n="Reflection")}}'s hitbox.
         The safe area is only as wide as the small four-pointed star within the inner circle.

   The two attacks can be distinguished by her voice line: {{light(t="Axe Kick")}}
   is accompanied by "Cleave!", and {{light(t="Scythe Kick")}} by "Reap!"

   At the same time as the point-blank or donut,
   the {{mob(n="Reflection")}} also shoots out four {{light(t="The House of Light")}} cones
   at the four nearest players,
   These cones, combined with the four marker AoEs, create an 8-way spread.

3. The four circular markers go off moments after the kick,
   hitting their targets with {{ice(t="Frigid Stone")}}
   at the same time as the first {{ice(t="Diamond Dust")}} circles go off.
   These drop a second set of AoEs, 8-way lines,
   with the omens appearing a few seconds after the {{ice(t="Frigid Stones")}} hit.
   These 8-way lines are similar to the ones during {{cast(n="Icelit Dragonsong")}}
   in phase 2 of {{gloss(k="E8S")}}.

4. The {{mob(n="Oracle's Reflection")}} moves out towards a principal direction
   and begins casting {{light(t="Sinbound Holy")}},
   while the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} reappears in the center of the arena.
   You will likely want to pay attention to the {{mob(n="Reflection")}}'s location,
   as it's important later.

   Without any warning, the {{mob(n="Usurper")}} performs {{ice(t="Heavenly Strike")}},
   a knockback raidwide, and disappears.
   This is the point where the second set of {{ice(t="Diamond Dust")}} AoEs go off.
   You must get knocked back into a spot that's safe from both the line AoEs
   and {{ice(t="Diamond Dust")}},
   with the final circles going off almost simultaneous with the lines.

After all of this, it isn't even over.

[^4]: Sometimes the lines are circles.

### Thin Ice

Right after the lines go off, {{light(t="Sinbound Holy")}} targets both {{healer(t="healers")}}
with four {{gloss(k="LP stacks")}} each, in quick succession.
Each hit leaves behind a puddle that inflicts {{buff(b="bleed-p2")}},
forcing the party to keep moving.

As players run away from {{light(t="Sinbound Holy")}},
the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} moves to the edge of the arena,
in a random {{gloss(k="principal direction")}}.

About 4 seconds after the last puddle drops, without any other warning,
she uses {{ice(t="Shining Armor")}}.
This is a gaze attack that inflicts {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}
and {{buff(b="stun", dur=8)}}.
The stun will make impossible to pass the next part of the mechanic,
so you can't look at {{mob(n="Shiva")}} no matter how hot she is.

Additionally, the arena will become {{buff(b="thin-ice", short=true)}} icy.
Moving will now send a player sliding most of the way across the arena.
Two bosses will also swap appearances.
The {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} changes to {{light(t="light form")}},
and will remain so for the rest of the phase,
at the same time as the {{mob(n="Oracle's Reflection")}} changes to {{ice(t="ice form")}}.

### Stillness & Silence

The {{mob(n="Usurper")}} will disappear while the {{mob(n="Reflection")}} begins casting
either {{ice(t="Twin Stillness")}} or {{ice(t="Twin Silence")}}.
Which attack she is using is also telegraphed by her voice line (and accompanying caption):
either {{ice(t='"In stillness freeze!"')}} or {{ice(t='"Sink into silence!"')}}

If she uses {{ice(t="Stillness")}}, she will first cleave a massive 270° in front of her,
leaving only a small safe area behind.
She will then cleave 90° her, hitting exactly the small area that was just safe.
If she uses {{ice(t="Silence")}}, she does the exact opposite,
first with a small cleave behind then a very large cleave in front.
Both cleaves are one-shots.

The snapshot on the first attack is right at the end of the first cast bar,
with the second coming earlier than you might expect.
In practice, the long slide required to get behind her,
versus the short slide to get in front of her,
mean that you have to move slightly earlier for {{ice(t="Stillness")}}.

The sequence finally wraps up as the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} reappears, targetable,
in the center of the arena.

## Sequence 2: Mirror, Mirror

### Hallowed Ray

Immediately after reappearing, the {{mob(n="Usurper")}} begins casting {{cast(n="Hallowed Ray")}}.
This is a {{gloss(k="full-party stack")}} line {{gloss(k="AoE")}} on a random player.

The only thing of note is that the attack direction snapshots quite early,
so it's actually possible for the targeted player to dodge it entirely.
This is not consistent, however, so it can't be used to avoid the mechanic.

### Mirror, Mirror

Her next cast is {{cast(n="Mirror, Mirror")}}.
This move summons three {{mob(n="Frozen Mirror")}}s around the edge of the arena at
{{gloss(k="principal directions")}}.
There will be two red mirrors and one blue mirror.
The red mirrors will always be 90° apart,
but the blue mirror can be anywhere, including in between them.

The {{mob(n="Usurper")}} begins casting {{light(t="Scythe Kick")}} which is the same as before:
a large donut with a very small hole,
and four protean cones at the nearest four players.
At exactly the same time, however, the blue mirror will also use the exact same move.
Since {{light(t="Scythe Kick")}} on its own is a four-way spread,
two copies of it make for an eight-way spread.

Right afterwards, the two red mirrors cast {{light(t="Reflected Scythe Kick")}}.
Unsurprisingly, this is the exact same move.
But it must be solved so that none of the players clip each other.

Each of the mirrors disappears shortly after

### Banish III

{{mob(n="Shiva")}}'s last cast in this segment is {{cast(n="Banish III")}},
which she begins casting right as the {{light(t="Reflected Scythe Kicks")}}
During the cast, she'll have a ring of light above her head,
with either a single orb or four orbs orbiting on it.

If there's only one orb, the attack is a {{gloss(k="pair stack")}} targeted on {{dps()}}.
If there's four, it's a spread targeted on {{dps()}}.
Unlike in {{gloss(k="E8S")}}, there are no indicators over individual players' heads.

## Sequence 3: Light Rampant

The infamous mechanic from {{gloss(k="E8S")}} is back, although it's arguably not even as bad.
Naturally enough,
it kicks off with a teleport to center and the {{light(t="Light Rampant")}} castbar.
There's a raidwide on this one, so make sure mits and shields are up.

This mechanic makes use of the {{buff(b="lightsteeped")}} debuff, given out by various attacks
through the mechanic:

| Source                    | Total Stacks |
| :------------------------ | :----------: |
| {{light(t="Light Rampant")}}         | 6 |
| First wave towers                    | 6 |
| {{light(t="Powerful Light")}} stacks | 8 |
| Second wave tower                    | 4 |
| {{light(t="House of Light")}} spread | 8 |

This is a total of 32 stacks,
which is exactly enough to give {{buff(b="lightsteeped", stacks=4, short=true)}} to every player.
This is very convenient, because {{buff(b="lightsteeped", stacks=5, short=true)}} causes a wipe.
Everyone must get exactly four stacks.

The initial raidwide doles out several markers and debuffs.
It is believed that these are given out completely at random, with no role-based patterns.

* Two players receive a pink marker with a circular {{gloss(k="AoE")}} {{gloss(k="omen")}}.
* The remaining six players each receive {{buff(b="chains-light", dur=10)}},
  visibly displaying as tethers connecting them to two other players.
  These tethers are not yet active.
  * Two of these players receive {{buff(b="weight-of-light", dur=16)}},
    indicated by large golden orbs above their heads.
* Six stacks of {{buff(b="lightsteeped", short=true, dur=36, stacks=1)}} are distributed.
  The players with markers each receive one stack,
  and the remaining four are distributed randomly amongst all eight players.

  So a player with a marker can receive 1 or 2 stacks,
  while a player with a tether can receive 0 or 1.
  
While the debuffs are mostly random, the tethers are not.
The two players with golden orbs are *always* tethered together.
Additionally, *provided the players stand roughly equally spaced*,
the tethers will not spawn crossed.[^1]

[^1]: It was initially believed that they could never spawn in with two tethers crossed,
      however, this was shown to be untrue.

      Our best theory on the actual mechanics of the tethers is that,
      after two players are randomly chosen as the marker players,
      one player is randomly chosen as the starting player for the tethers.
      This player is tethered to the closest player (without a marker),
      who is then tethered to the next closest player,
      and so on, until everyone either has a marker or a tether,
      and then one more tether is added to close the loop.
      The orbs go out to two random tethered players.

### First Wave Towers

A moment after the cast, {{mob(n="Shiva")}} disappears and six towers appear.
The orientation is always the same: a perfect hexagon with points to the north and south.

The markers begin going off first
with a series of four {{light(t="Luminous Hammer")}} attacks each.
These inflict {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=1)}},
but more importantly they drop lethal puddles on the ground like {{light(t="Sinbound Holy")}}.
Don't stand in bad.[^2]

The towers go off simultaneously with the third set of puddles,
inflicting {{buff(b="lightsteeped", stacks=1, short=true, dur="36")}}
A missed tower is a heavy raidwide with a {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}.
Although the towers do not inflict a {{buff(b="mvuln", short=true)}} themselves,
they are magic damage,
so players taking a tower cannot also be hit by a {{light(t="Luminous Hammer")}}.

At the same time as the towers go off, the {{buff(b="chains-light", short=true)}} expire,
becoming {{buff(b="curse-light", dur=9)}}.
This is indicated by the orbs in the middle of the tethers growing more brightly.
Unlike in the original Light Rampant, for these tethers there is no maximum distance,
but if any two tethered players get too close together before the debuffs expire,
they will explode and cause a wipe.

[^2]: For {{dps(t="black mages")}}: It's okay, it's a downtime phase again.

### Orbs

The six silver orbs that descended on the towers, {{mob(n="Holy Lights")}},
hover in place above the ground.

Three of them, in an equilateral triangle,
begin casting {{cast(n="Burst")}} and display large circular {{gloss(k="omens")}}.
The other three follow suit shortly after.
This is very similar to the fists during the phase 4 transition of {{gloss(k="TOP")}},
if you are familiar with that fight.

As the second wave of omens appears,
the {{buff(b="weight-of-light", short=true)}} denotate in a small circular {{gloss(k="AoE")}}.
This is {{light(t="Powerful Light")}},
a {{gloss(k="LP stack")}} that inflicts {{buff(b="lightsteeped", short=true, dur=36, stacks=1)}}.
If fewer than 4 players are in the stack, it additionally inflicts {{buff(b="mom", dur="2m")}}.
A 4-stack tower also appears in the center of the arena at the same time.

After the {{light(t="Powerful Light")}}—but not right after, so don't move too soon!—the first
wave of orbs explodes.
The puddles begin disappearing in the sequence they were dropped,
and the second wave of orbs explodes as {{mob(n="Shiva")}} reappears in the center.
She remains untargetable as she begins casting {{cast(n="Banish III")}}.
The telegraph and effects are identical to the first time she used it.

### Second Wave Tower

4 players must soak the tower to prevent the {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m")}} raidwide
and receive a stack of {{buff(b="lightsteeped", short=true, stacks=1, dur=36)}}.
Care must be taken that nobody takes on too many stacks.
{{cast(n="Banish III")}} resolves a few seconds later.

{{mob(n="Shiva")}} wraps the mechanic up by casting {{light(t="House of Light")}},
becoming targetable at the start of the cast.
{{light(t="House of Light")}} is an 8-way cone spread.
This inflicts a final stack of {{buff(b="lightsteeped", short=true, stacks=1, dur=36)}}
on every player.
If executed correctly, everyone should now have 4 stacks.
They will fall off harmlessly during the transition to the intermission.

## Enrage

The phase ends with {{mob(n="Shiva")}} casting {{ice(t="Absolute Zero")}}, the enrage.
If the party does not bring her below 20% HP before it completes,
it deals infinite damage and wipes the party.
If she is brought below 20%, however, it is only a heavy raidwide.
As the transition to the intermission begins, she knocks every back from the center,
so don't stand too far out and get pushed into the wall.

## Acknowledgments

Thanks in particular go out to {{mob(n="Mikah Tayuun")}}, {{mob(n="Aleretha Nyana")}},
{{mob(n="Esey Faye")}}, {{mob(n="Nicky")}}, {{mob(n="Seba")}}, and {{mob(n="felty fan")}}
for helping me with mechanics in this phase.
As always, thanks also to everyone else in the NAUR discord who helped,
as well as anyone who's uploaded PoVs and guides.
