+++
title="Phase 5: Pandora"
weight=5
description = "Mechanical guide to phase 5 of Futures Rewritten (Ultimate)."

[extra]
toc = true
sectoc = true
short_title = "Pandora"
+++

After completing phase 4 with both
the {{mob(n="Usurper of Frost")}} and the {{mob(n="Oracle of Darkness")}} dying,
the two will become balls of {{light()}} and {{dark(t="darkness")}} and merge together.

If the {{mob(n="Fragment of Fate")}} did *not* survive phase 4 intact---or
if it never spawned because the {{mob(n="Eternal Ice Fragment")}} wasn't saved
in the crystal intermission---then the transition to the bad ending will *not* be a cutscene
and players will retain control of their characters.
The phase 5 arena will appear, and the {{mob(n="Guardian of Eden")}} appears
at the north side of the arena.
It immediately casts {{cast(n="Paradise Lost")}}, wiping the party.

If the {{mob(n="Fragment of Fate")}} *did* survive phase 4,
then the transition is a cutscene in which Ryne and Gaia's memories fight Mitron for control.
The result is Ryne and Gaia's merged form, {{mob(n="Pandora")}},[^1]
the final boss of Futures Rewritten.
Players will be knocked back to south of center and given {{buff(b="down-for-the-count")}}
for the minute-long (yes, really) cutscene.
The arena transitions to the phase 1 arena from {{gloss(k="E12S")}},
with Ryne and Gaia's memories showing in the background,
and Return to Oblivion kicks in.
The {{buff(b="down-for-the-count", short=true)}} fades as the final fight begins.

Note that throughout this phase, {{mob(n="Pandora")}} attacks with
{{light()}} on her {{light(t="left side")}} and
{{dark()}} on her {{dark(t="right side")}}.
This orientation is based on her wings and never changes.

[^1]: Interestingly, in Japanese she's called
{{mob(n="Pandora Mitron")}} ({{mob(n="パンドラ・ミトロン")}}),
which comes off quite differently, ね?
The name is a reference to the Lunatic Pandora from FF8.

## Sequence 1: Fulgent Blade

{{mob(n="Pandora")}} kicks things off with {{cast(n="Fulgent Blade")}},
a raidwide that causes six lines of light and darkness to appear on the ground.
The pattern of the lines is always the same,
although the positioning can vary so it might look different sometimes.
The six lines are always offset 45° from one another,
making a sort of 3/4 circle around the middle of the arena.

These are all {{gloss(k="exalines")}} that detonate two at a time,
moving outwards from their lines of origin.
Starting from one side of the 3/4-circle,
the outermost two lines on one side will detonate,
then the middle two,
then finally the two on the other side.
Each pair will be arranged so that the lines from the light and dark sides cross.

Before each line explodes, an {{gloss(k="omen")}} appears showing the upcoming explosion,
with many arrows indicating that the line {{gloss(k="AoEs")}} are going to move.
The first two exalines go off, and then they repeat in the directions indicated,
perpendicular to the original line they came from.
There are no omens for the subsequent explosions.

The detonations go as follows:

|      | First Wave     | Second Wave    | Third Wave     | Pandora |
| ---: | :--------:     | :---------:    | :--------:     | :-----: |
| 1.   | Omens appear   |                |                |         |
| 2.   | 1st explosions |                |                |         |
| 3.   | 2nd explosions | Omens appear   |                |         |
| 4.   | 3rd explosions | 1st explosions |                |         |
| 5.   | 4th explosions | 2nd explosions | Omens appear   | Lock direction |
| 6.   | 5th explosions | 3rd explosions | 1st explosions | Akh Morn ... |
| 7.   | 6th explosions | 4th explosions | 2st explosions | Akh Morn ... |
| 8.   | 7th explosions | 5th explosions | 3rd explosions | Akh Morn ... |
| 8.   | 8th explosions | 6th explosions | 4th explosions | Akh Morn ... |
| 8.   |                | 7th explosions | 5th explosions | {{cast(n="Akh Morn")}} |

Each exaline will have a total of 8 waves of explosions,
although only the first few are typically relevant.

Being hit by an exaline will likely not kill a topped player,
but it will inflict both {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m")}} and
either {{buff(b="lvuln", dur=15)}} or {{buff(b="dvuln", dur=15)}},
giving vulnerability to the *same* element of the line that hit.

This is a bit hard to visualize without an image,
so I will try to come back and add one,
but for now text will have to do.

**tl;dr:** It's three waves of exalines at funny angles.

### Akh Morn

At about the same time as the fifth set of explosions from the last wave of exalines---or
the ninth set of explosions overall---{{mob(n="Pandora")}}
will start casting {{cast(n="Akh Morn")}}.
This time, {{cast(n="Akh Morn")}} is a simple {{gloss(k="LP stack")}},
with no penalty for understacking.

The only catch is the targeting condition:
One random player on her {{light(t="left side")}} is targeted by a {{light(t="light explosion")}},
and one random player on her {{dark(t="right")}} is targeted by a {{dark(t="dark explosion")}}.
If no player is on the correct side, it targets a random player on the other side instead.
Her position locks in at the start of the cast, so players need to position themselves afterwards.

## Sequence 2: Paradise Regained

Just before the last (irrelevant) exalines denotate,
{{mob(n="Pandora")}} centers, faces north, and starts casting {{cast(n="Paradise Regained")}}.
This kicks off the most complex of phase 5's three sequences.

When the cast completes, three 2-stack towers begin appearing, one by one,
in an equilateral triangle around the center of the arena.
The towers always appear S, NW, and NE, but in a random order.
They will detonate in the order they appear.

As the second tower appears, {{mob(n="Pandora")}} begins casting {{cast(n="Wings Dark and Light")}},
and either her {{light(t="left wing")}} will start glowing with {{light()}},
or her {{dark(t="right wing")}} will start glowing with {{dark(t="darkness")}}.
One player will get attached to her by a {{light()}} or {{dark()}} tether,
matching the glowing wing.

About 2/3 of the way through the cast,
the third tower appears, and {{mob(n="Pandora")}}'s other wing starts glowing.
Her wing and tether attacks will follow the order that the wings glowed,
either {{light()}} then {{dark()}}, or {{dark()}} then {{light()}}.

The mechanic goes off in three waves: the first tower, wing, and tether;
then the second tower, wing, and tether; and finally the last tower.

1. The towers explode in a painful raidwide with {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}
   if not soaked properly.
   They inflict {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=7)}}, which lasts the duration of the mechanic,
   so whoever soaks the tower cannot soak another one, nor get hit by the tether.

2. The wing attack is a massive 225°[^3] tankbuster cleave
   that hits the entire quarter of the arena in front of {{mob(n="Pandora")}},
   as well as the entire side of the corresponding wing.
   The safe zone is therefore anywhere beside or behind her
   and on the {{light(t="right")}} or {{dark(t="left")}} side, depending on the wing/element.

   But immediately before she executes the cleave, she turns to face the main tank,
   (that is, the player with top enmity).
   So the safe zone is actually relative to this player.
   Anyone *other* than the top enmity player hit by this attack
   will receive a {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}, so cheesing it is not an option. [^4]

   Despite having a visual element, the cleave is physical and inflicts {{buff(b="pvuln", dur=4)}}.
   The {{buff(b="pvuln", short=true)}} makes the follow-up cleave lethal,
   but not the other attacks in the sequence.
   The target lock-in is typical for a tankbuster,
   with the first target getting locked in early in the cast,
   and the second locking in roughly when the castbar completes.

3. The tether always has the same element as the cleave,
   and targets the {{light(t="farthest")}} or {{dark(t="nearest")}} player other than the main tank,
   depending on the element.
   The tether moves to whoever is {{light(t="farthest")}} or {{dark(t="nearest")}} automatically,
   just acting as a visual indication of who will be hit.
   It cannot be passed otherwise.

   The actual attack is a small circular tankbuster
   that inflicts {{buff(b="mvuln", dur=4, short=true)}}.
   Thus, like the wing cleave, the same player cannot take it twice without facing lethal damage,
   nor can they take a tower on the same or next wave.
   It is, however, possible for a player hit by the first tether to safely soak the last tower.

Note that the attacks don't come out at quite the same time:
the tower hits first, then the wing, then the tether, in rapid succession.
It is possible to move too early and get hit twice.

[^3]: Many raidplans show it as a 240° (two-thirds of a circle) cleave,
      based on misreading of earlier footage.
      Closer examination seems to indicate that 225° is the correct size.

[^4]: I've heard some folks say it doesn't inflict {{buff(b="ddown", short=true)}} as well,
      but I'm going by the story I've heard with the most supporting info.
      If anyone has footage that definitively answers if the cleave does/doesn't inflict
      {{buff(b="ddown", short=true)}}, please let me know.

## Sequence 3 Polarizing Strikes

The final mechanical sequence of this phase is {{cast(n="Polarising Strikes")}},
which {{mob(n="Pandora")}} begins casting after a single autoattack.
This autoattack gives her a chance to reorient towards the main tank
before the next castbar locks her facing for the rest of the sequence.

The cast goes off as two line {{gloss(k="AoEs")}}, one {{light()}} and one {{dark()}}.
The targeting is the same as with {{cast(n="Akh Morn")}} earlier:
{{light()}} targets a random player on {{mob(n="Pandora")}}'s {{light(t="left")}} side,
while {{dark()}} targets a random player on her {{dark(t="right")}} side.
If no players are on the correct side, a random player on the other side is targeted instead.

The lines are each {{gloss(k="LP stacks")}},
with the additional twist that the player in front---that is, closest to {{mob(n="Pandora")}}---is
affected by {{buff(b="lvuln", dur=16)}} or {{buff(b="dvuln", dur=16)}},
for the *same* element they were hit by.
Therefore, that player will receive lethal damage
if hit by the same element again, for the remainder of the sequence.

After the main line AoE, the line's effect remains on the ground.
After about 2 seconds, it explodes, dealing a follow-up blow to anyone caught in it.
This follow-up inflicts {{buff(b="ddown", dur="2m", short=true)}}, so get out of the way.

**NOTE:** The actual AoE is slightly wider than the visual effects of the line make it seem.
Give the line plenty of room when dodging.

This attack repeats three more times, for a total of four.
The subsequent casts are entitled {{cast(n="Polarised Paths")}}, but the effects are identical.[^2]

[^2]: Oddly, in Japanese, all four casts have the same name. I'm not sure about other languages.
      Don't be confused by that, if you play in another language.
      All four attacks are always the same.

## Pandora's Box

It couldn't be a {{mob(n="Pandora")}} without a {{cast(n="Box")}}, would it?
But the contents of {{cast(n="Pandora's Box")}} really aren't that interesting.
It's just a tank LB3 check, although the visuals are stunning.
Pop the LB around the 'd' in the castbar, and with extra mits on top, and you should be all good.

## Loop

From this point, the fight loops.
{{mob(n="Pandora")}} repeats the first three mechanics, {{cast(n="Fulgent Blade")}},
{{cast(n="Paradise Regained")}}, and {{cast(n="Polarizing Strikes")}}.
The only difference is that the mechanics come faster the second time,
and {{mob(n="Pandora")}} will not use an autoattack, and therefore will not change facing,
 before using {{cast(n="Polarizing Strikes")}}.
She will stay facing the same direction
as when she used the second cleave in {{cast(n="Paraise Regained")}}.

After this, she uses {{cast(n="Fulgent Blade")}} for a third time,
and this third instance is identical to the first two.

## Enrage

Finally, frustrated with her lack of progress, {{mob(n="Pandora")}} begins the enrage cast,
{{cast(n="Paradise Lost")}}.
From here on, simply a DPS check to free the lesbians and earn your totems.
But there is one last twist.

As the castbar reaches about halfway full, Ryne will lend her strength to the party,
filling the limit gauge by about 1 1/2 bars.
Assuming you haven't used a limit break since {{cast(n="Pandora's Box")}},
this should completely fill the gauge.
You now have a free melee LB3, but act quick,
because the window of opportunity is very tight.
Even a few seconds of delay and the LB will not land before the enrage cast goes off.

Enjoy the spectacular enrage sequence, with rainbows *literally shooting off the lesbians*
as you race for the finish.
If you don't make it... sorry, that's rough.
There's a brief easter egg cutscene, at least?

If you do make it, however, enjoy the final cutscene of the fight
and your chance to curse YoshiP's cowardice.
The background post-victory will make all the gposers jealous.

And then go get one of the sickets weapons in the game,
turn on that sweet "Genesis of Legends" title,
and complain loudly about the lack of a framing kit.

You've earned it.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks on this page go to {{mob(n="Shas'o Mahana")}} and {{mob(n="Tenkay")}},
plus all the usual thanks.
